## About
Simulates wave propagation in Cosserat (or micropolar) media.
Simulation is performed by computing the Fourier-domain Green's function according to *Microcontinuum Field Theories* by Eringen, 1999.
All results simulate wave propagation in the infinite medium.

Currently 3D code for elastic or Cosserat media are tested and implemented.
2D Cosserat also has an implementation, but it is not tested and may not be accurate.


### Background
The goal of this project is to provide computations for wave propagation in the Cosserat medium similarly to [SPECFEMPP](https://github.com/PrincetonUniversity/SPECFEMPP).
While this package only simulates the infinite homogeneous medium, it does so using the analytic solutions computed by Eringen (1999), as opposed to a timestep method.
Thus, it is not susceptible to grid-based discretization errors, particularly those related to frequency support.

This package only computes seismograms at specified locations, and each seismogram is computed separately.
Thus, the full wavefield is not computed, and is much more expensive than with SPECFEM.
Nevertheless, if only a few seismograms are of interest, this code is generally faster than CPU code for SPECFEM, though not GPU code.

## Installation
### Download
Via https:
```
git clone https://github.com/maxlchien/Cosserat-Solver.git
```
Via SSH:
```
git clone git@github.com:maxlchien/Cosserat-Solver.git
```
### Install
It is recommended to use `uv` for installation, since this is compatible with the `Snakefile` workflows in the examples.

```
uv pip install .
```

## Usage
After writing a `params.yaml` file according to the [Parameter Description](#parameter-description), run the solver using the following command:
```
cosserat-solver --yaml <path/to/params.yaml> --o <output-directory>
```
The `--o <output-directory>` flag may be omitted; in this case the default is OUTPUT_FILES.
For a complete list of CLI flags, see [CLI Arguments](#cli-arguments).


### Example Usage: 3D Cosserat Wave Propagation
If using `uv`, the `Snakefile` present in the examples will work out of the box.
Otherwise, the jobs will need to be edited to avoid the use of `uv run`.

To run the 3D Cosserat wave propagation example:
```
cd examples/cosserat_3d_benchmark
snakemake -c1
```
The traces will be generated in the `OUTPUT_FILES` directory.
They are graphed against reference traces generated by `SPECFEMPP` in `OUTPUT_FILES/displacement_plot.png` and `OUTPUT_FILES/rotation_plot.png`.
Various fit metrics are detailed in `OUTPUT_FILES/analysis/comparison_summary.txt`.

If your computer supports the Fortran backend and OpenMP, then changing `-c1` to supply more cores will speed up the runtime.
Try `-c4` or `-c8` and compare the runtime in the logfile `OUTPUT_FILES/cosserat_solver.log`.

As an exercise, open the file `params.yaml` and change the following block:

```
simulation_params:
  dt: 0.01
  N: 5000
  refinement_factor: 1
  extension_factor: 8
```
to
```
simulation_params:
  dt: 0.01
  N: 5000
  refinement_factor: 1
  extension_factor: 32
```
The resulting fit metrics will display increased accuracy, particularly in the rotation traces.

### CLI Arguments
<details>

#### Parameter file `--yaml <path/to/params.yaml>`
Path to the input parameter file, formatted according to [Parameter Description](parameter-description).

#### Output directory `--o <directory-name>`
The directory where output files and logs are generated.
Defaults to `OUTPUT_FILES`.
<a id="backend-control"></a>
#### Backend control `--allow-python-backend`, `--use-python-backend`
For some medium-dimension combinations, the core computation steps are implemented in both Fortran and Python.
The default behavior is to use the Fortran backend, and to error if it is not available.
The flag `--allow-python-backend` allows for a fallback to the Python backend if Fortran is not available, and `--use-python-backend` forces the use of Python.
This can also be specified in the parameter file, but the flag will override anything specified in the parameter file.
For arbitrary precision compatible media, the Python backend must be used.

| Medium | Dimension | Fortran Backend Available |
| ------ | --------- | ------------------------- |
| Cosserat| 2|&check;|
| Elastic | 3| &check;|
| Cosserat| 3| &check;|
#### OpenMP control `--force-use-openmp`, `--force-no-openmp`
When the Fortran backend is used, OpenMP can be used to parallelize computation.
By default, OpenMP is used (when available) for arrays larger than 1000 elements.
The flag `--force-use-openmp` forces the use of OpenMP even for small arrays, and `--force-no-openmp` avoids OpenMP even for large arrays.

The array size is given by `N x refinement_factor x extension_factor` (see [Parameter Description](parameter-description)).
#### Output verbosity `--verbose`, `--debug`
By default, only warnings and errors are printed to `stderr`.
INFO level logging is printed to the logfile.

With `--verbose`, INFO logging is printed to `stderr` and DEBUG logging is printed to the logfile.

With `--debug`, DEBUG logging is printed to both.
</details>

### Parameter Description

<details>
<summary> Sample `params.yaml` file </summary>

```
dimension: 3
material_type: cosserat
backend: fortran # defaults to fortran. either fortran, python, or auto (auto will choose fortran if available, otherwise python)

material_params:
  rho: 2300
  lam: 7.682e9
  mu: 5.175e9
  nu: 1e2
  J: 2300
  lam_c: 6e9
  mu_c: 2e9
  nu_c: 0

sources:
  - type: Ricker
    location: [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
    f0: 0.1
    factor: 1
    tshift: 0.0
    f: [1.0e8, 2.0e8, 4.0e7]
    fc: [2.0e11, 5.0e11, 1.0e12]

simulation_params:
  dt: 0.01
  N: 5000
  # t0: 0.0  # For best results, do not specify t0 at all, and let the solver automatically set it to match SPECFEM source timings
  refinement_factor: 1
  extension_factor: 8

receivers:
  network: "DB" # optional, defaults to AA
  receiver_list:
  - location: [0, 10000, 0]
    name: "X55" # optional, defaults to S0001, S0002, etc.
    seismogram_type: # defaults to both displacement and rotation for Cosserat, only displacement for elastic
      - displacement
      - rotation
  - location: [10000, 0, 0]
    name: "X60"
  - location: [0, 0, 10000]
    name: "X65"
  - location: [10000, 10000, 10000]
    name: "X70"
  - location: [-10000, -10000, -10000]
    name: "X75"
```

</details>

<details>

Parameters are specified using a YAML file with the following:

#### Material type `material_type: cosserat` or `material_type: elastic`
Either `cosserat` or `elastic`.

Default: `cosserat`.

#### Dimension `dimension: <2 or 3>`
An integer that is either 2 or 3.

#### Backend `backend: fortran` or `backend: python` or `backend: auto`
See the CLI flag section for more details.
`fortran` and `python` force the respective backends to be used; `auto` defaults to Fortran but uses Python if unavailable.

Default: Fortran

#### Material parameters `material_params:`
An object containing the following attributes:
<details>
<summary> Material parameters </summary>

|Parameter|Syntax (scientific notation may be used)|
|----|---|
|Density $\rho$| `rho: <float>`|
|Lam&eacute;'s first parameter $\lambda$|`lam: <float>`|
|Lam&eacute;'s second parameter $\mu$|`mu: <float>`|
|Cosserat coupling parameter $\nu$|`nu: <float>`|
|Isotropic microinertia $j$|`J: <float>` **NOTE**: J must be capitalized|
|Coupled lambda $\lambda_c$|`lam_c: <float>`|
|Coupled mu $\mu_c$|`mu_c: <float>`|
|Coupled nu $\nu_c$|`nu_c: <float>`|
</details>

For elastic simulations, only `rho`, `lam`, `mu` must be specified.

#### Source Parameters `sources:`
Currently, only Ricker sources are supported.

A list of source objects.
Each source object should contain the following attributes:

`type: <string>`: Specifies the source type. Currently the only option is "Ricker".

Ricker sources may also specify the following optional attributes:
<details>
<summary> Source parameters </summary>


|Syntax|Description|Default|Notes|
|---|---|---|---|
|`location: list[float]`|The coordinates of the source, with length equal to dimension|Origin in 2D or 3D, resp.||
|`f0: <float>`|Central frequency of the Ricker source|`25.0`|In Hz|
|`factor: <float>`|Scaling factor<br>Globally scales the intensity of the source by the given factor|`1.0`||
|2D:`f: <float>`<br>3D: `f: [<float>, <float>, <float>]`|In 2D: scales the displacement intensity only by the given factor<br>In 3D: Gives the source's direction vector for the displacement components (coordinates `x,y,z`).|2D: `1.0`<br>3D: `[1.0, 1.0, 1.0]`||
|2D:`fc: <float>`<br>3D: `fc: [<float>, <float>, <float>]`|In 2D: scales the rotation intensity only by the given factor<br>In 3D: Gives the source's direction vector for the rotation components (coordinates `x,y,z`).|2D: `1.0`<br>3D: `[1.0, 1.0, 1.0]`|For elastic media, this value is not used and may be omitted.|
|`tshift: <float>`|Shifts the source in time by the specified amount. May be negative.|`0.0`|In seconds|
|`angle: <float>`|Rotates the source's direction vector by the specified angle from the x axis.|`0.0`|In degrees.<br>Uses the same convention as `specfem2d`.
</details>

#### General Simulation Parameters `simulation_params:`
Controls the inverse Fourier transform logic.
`dt`, `N`, and `t0` control the time array for the generated trace.
If further accuracy is desired, `refinement_factor` and `extension_factor` can be used.
Generally, `extension_factor` is much more useful for improving accuracy.
This is because it mitigates wraparound errors, and also because it generally corresponds to better resolution of low frequencies, while `refinement_factor` gets better resolution of high frequencies, which tend to have less energy content.

<details>
<summary> General Simulation Parameters </summary>

#### Time array parameters `N: <int>`, `dt: <float>`, `t0: <float>`
The final trace will be computed on a time array beginning at time $t_0$ and ending at time $t_0 + (N-1)*dt$, with length $N$ and increment $dt$.

If $t_0$ is not specified then it is set to the earliest start time of the sources. For Ricker sources, the start time is $-1.2 / f_0$, with an additional adjustment for the `tshift` parameter.

#### Accuracy parameters `refinement_factor: <int>`, `extension_factor: <int>`
`refinement_factor` performs the computations on a finer intermediate array, then discards the extra values in the final trace.

`extension_factor` computes the trace on a longer time interval (expanded about the center of the interval), then discard the extra values in the final trace.

</details>

#### Receiver parameters `receivers:`
An object containing the following attributes:

A SEED network name `network: <string>`, which serves as the prefix for seismogram files. Defaults to "AA".

A list of receiver objects `receiver_list:`.
A receiver object is specified as
```
- location: list[float]
  name: <string>
  seismogram_type:
    - displacement
    - rotation
```
Location is mandatory.
Name is optional and defaults to S0001, S0002, etc., depending on the position of the station in the list.
If no seismogram type is specified, then the default is both displacement and rotation for Cosserat materials, or just displacement for elastic.

</details>

### OpenMP Thread Arguments
If OpenMP is available, the maximum number of threads can be controlled using the environment variable `OMP_NUM_THREADS`.
When running this from a snakemake job, the `threads:` key sets the number of threads available to each rule.
If `threads` is set to `workflow.cores`, the number provided can be controlled for each run by running `snakemake -c1`, `snakemake -c8`, etc.

